hi I'm Nellie and I'm here in swamp art
with BBC Earth we are currently here in
the Caribbean which is the world's
northernmost town and it is on Svalbard
which is situated halfway between
mainland Norway and the North Pole
[Music]
so every day in longer being you could
think that oh this is just a normal town
and then you go for a jog and then you
reach the limits of the city and there's
a huge sign saying like extreme polar
bear danger behind this sign is like you
kind of forget how special it is but
then there are reminders everywhere
[Music]
this were here on small bug where there
are polar bears we have to bring a polar
bear guard Oh
polar bear guard and what is your chore
is to see polar bears and keep you safe
so keep them at the distance away from
the group and how do you do that do you
normally use the flare gun or common
sense try to spot them far further away
and try to keep our distance and if they
approach 99% of the cases flare guns
aren't the best ways to deal with polar
bears approaching a group we can hold
off to follow because we have quite many
flares and then we can have a helicopter
appear if they within 40 minutes one
hour and they can chase the bear away
and that's a much more desirable outcome
than actually shooting a polar bear
that's why the population is doing
something so good up here
so if you're out and about and do spot a
polar bear the most important thing is
to stay calm and try to gather your
group and walk slowly away and the
absolute worst thing you can do is to
kind of scatter around you may think
that oh but maybe won't eat me then but
that just makes a polar bear attack way
more likely and if you start running
away you can also kind of wake up its
hunting instincts so it will start
chasing you and that is quite scary
because they are surprisingly fast
although they don't run far
[Music]
so in the Arctic even though the
calendar says summer it's not
necessarily that worm it's usually
around six degrees and if you're really
lucky it can pass 10 degrees but that is
on very special occasions so usually
what you wear is one layer of wool
against your skin and then another layer
of wool over your wolf and then if
you're really cold another layer of wool
but then outermost layer is important it
should be windproof and waterproof or
else if it starts raining a little bit
you'll just get wet and cold or if it
starts blowing a little bit it'll just
be super cold like to the bone but with
wool and a nice little
everything-proof layer you'll be nice
and toasty since we're sitting still
while we're filming I have to dance a
lil little bit to keep warm
I don't freeze to the permafrost
[Music]
because of the permafrost you can't
really build anything on the ground here
so what you'll see is that all the
houses are on stilts longer bein is home
to three kindergartens and the world's
northernmost school
if you want to go grocery shopping
you're gonna have to pass our terrifying
stuff polar bear with the Norwegian flag
Oh longer being is home to a lot of slay
dogs and you see these all around to
keep them nice and toasty while you're
shopping or out with friends although
they actually don't need it usually sled
dogs just let himself be buried in the
snow and they're warm there these are
the kind of trash cans you'll find here
in long European because anything more
fragile would just make it so that the
polar bear could come in knock it over
and eat our trash and that attracts more
polar bears so this is what you get up
here this is a kick sled
and as you can see it's in the
completely wrong season but in winter
it's really nice because these guys are
made out of iron and will slide Ethan on
the ice and then you just kick towards
the ice and you slide all the way to
where you want to go
[Music]
longer bein used to be a coal mining
town and you can still see remnants of
that period today scattered around the
terrain and my grandpa used to be a coal
miner in this very town the coal mining
attracted a lot of people so my grandma
was actually up here being a nanny for a
rich family and that is how my grandpa
and my grandma met and then decades
later I go here to study and I see the
very mines that my grandpa used to work
in and it's just gone full circle
[Music]
another fun fact about small bud is that
you're not allowed to have cats here
cats kill a lot of birds and they're not
a species that should be here
but there is one cats in barns work
registered as the Fox and another thing
that's different up here is that in the
summer we have the Midnight Sun which
means it's light 24 hours a day the Sun
never sets and in winter we have the
polar night which means that the Sun
never Rises it's dark 24 hours a day
[Music]
so yesterday when we were on our way
back on the boats because we had been to
company we passed a glacier and then I
saw one other Oh like a little iceberg
with sort of like a yellowish colour
that was behaving strangely and then I
realized it's not and it's not a lump of
ice it's the head of a polar bear
swimming past our boat it's incredible
the closest I've ever been and I've
never seen one swimming before and it
was just an insane moments like think
you couldn't have been more than like 50
meters away from our boat and I was I
was a little bit terrified but mostly I
was just in awe it's about how big it is
how majestic it is and it's a
once-in-a-lifetime experience yeah I
don't even know what to say about it it
is quite the sight to be seen
[Music]
ever wonder what it's like to live in
the world's northernmost city well it's
kind of weird and kind of wonderful
[Music]